[THEME MUSIC]
>> "Thinking Allowed,"
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
>> Hello and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today we're going to
explore the wellspring
of women's spirituality.
I'm pleased to be with Dr. Jean
Shinoda Bolen, Jungian analyst,
member of the
Department of Psychiatry
at the University of California
Medical School in San
Francisco, and author of
a number of classic books,
including "Goddesses in
Everywoman," "Gods in Everyman"
"The Tao of Psychology,"
"Crossing to Avalon,"
"Close to the Bone,"
and "The Ring of Power."
Welcome, Jean.
>> Thank you.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you.
You know, when I think
of esoteric culture,
the mystery traditions around
the world, authentic mysticism,
over and over again
it actually strikes me
that all mystical traditions
are about feminine spirituality,
about preserving something
that has been lost
in the patriarchal culture.
>> I would agree that it's
about the experience itself.
So it's not about having a
book or a transcendent god
speaking from above or
giving the message to someone
who passes it on.
It's non-hierarchical.
And it isn't about words.
So consequently, anything
that is a mystery
is a mystical experience.
It is an experience that you
know intuitively in your heart,
in your soul.
And you have it.
You can't take it and
make somebody else believe
in it, not that you're
even inclined to do so.
So in that way, it's
a more feminine model
of being receptive to the
mystical, spiritual experience,
feeling it in your body soul,
and then having an experience
that changes you.
And it's an experience
that I felt that,
because it's so
personal, that you
have to have some
way of describing it
through your own life.
So I wrote "Crossing to Avalon"
as a story of my own midlife
pilgrimage.
But it was far more
than a personal story.
It was really the
vehicle in order
to describe what it is that I
had discovered along the way
and put into words
of women's often
mystical spiritual experiences.
Because if you're in a
traditional society where
religion owns all the words,
all the spiritual words
like "sacramental,"
like "grace,"
then you can have an experience
that is enormously sacramental,
but it isn't in any kind
of official experience.
And what happens if
you have an experience
and you don't have
words for it is it
goes back into the
psyche, forgotten.
And one of the things, if
you go out on a pilgrimage,
is that as you go
towards this place,
you also go in and start
to think about and remember
experiences you've had.
So I was invited to
go on a pilgrimage
to visit my own spiritual
sources, is what it began as.
>> That's an interesting
term, "sources."
>> It's true.
The whole idea turned out
to be very interesting,
because I didn't realize--
since I was at the
start of my 49th year
and also my profession
as a Jungian an analyst,
I'm not in my body
very much in my work.
I'm in my intuition.
I might say I'm in my
feelings and in my mind,
but that I actually might pick
up information, especially
spiritual experience,
through my body
and then remember that lots
of other previous experiences
fit that description
also is what I
did with "Crossing to Avalon."
Now, I didn't
realize that people
had been going on pilgrimages
for thousands of years
to quicken their divinity.
And once I got a sense of
those particular words,
it really struck me that I know
what those words are about.
>> Quicken the divinity.
Because as a pregnant woman,
I knew that I was pregnant.
Test said I was.
I was tired.
Body was changing.
And what a difference
it was when
I felt movement of new
life, my baby moving in me.
That is how we use the
word "quicken," you see.
So what does it mean if you use
it about quicken the divinity?
Why would you go to
places of pilgrimage
to quicken the divinity?
What might that mean?
That was the mystery.
So then I go to
Chartres Cathedral,
and I go through the
Cathedral the first time
like a sightseer, art
history student, appreciator
of all the beauty around me.
>> Much to see.
And then, because I
remember that there was a--
this was a Black Madonna site
before it was a Christian site,
and that there was a well
somewhere at this site.
And I gathered that it was in
the crypt of this cathedral.
So I had an opportunity to go
on a sort of unofficial tour
down into the crypt with a
guide who didn't speak English.
So here again, we're making
a descent, basically.
Lighting is dim.
I'm in an unusual
place, an unusual land.
Somebody is talking to
me in a foreign language.
>> Under this huge cathedral.
>> Under this huge
cathedral, right.
And something is shifting in me.
And I think it has to do with
moving out of the left brain,
out of that mind that is
educated and therefore has
this view of things, into
the perceptive mind that
has her own experience.
So I do this, and then I
come up to the Cathedral.
And for me, it's
like inner and outer
often happen together, that
when I'm deeply moved inside,
some synchronicity on the
outside happens to enhance it.
So this time when I come
up in the Cathedral,
it's like the organist
begins to play.
So I have background
music to this.
And now I don't
have to sight see
because I've seen that place.
And what I'm feeling is
that there's energy here
that I'm picking up in my body.
And now I'm just
moving to the church,
to where the energy
is the greatest.
And I realized that I
have in my body what
could be like a tuning
fork to the energy.
And where the transepts
cross the nave,
that was where the
energy in front of-- it
was in front of the altar.
That was the energy was
the greatest for me.
And as I stood
there and just was
receptive to what was
coming into my mind,
I realized that if I were
as large as this Cathedral,
like this, where
the labyrinth was--
is would be where my
uterus or womb is.
And isn't this-- and this whole
sense of this feminine space
that I was in began
to make me realize
that this might be something
about the quickening
experience.
That is, you feel
something in your body.
And it is involved with
the energy of the place.
So might we truly all
be spiritual beings
on this human path, our souls?
Might we be moved to go on
pilgrimage, to go to places
where they said divinity lived?
But what happens there is that
you become aware that it's
been in you all the time.
>> If I understand the
chronology correctly,
by the time you had gone on this
pilgrimage, you were already,
I dare say, a
world-famous author.
Your book "Goddesses in
Everywoman" was a best-seller.
>> Right, it was.
>> And you now here in
the heart of a cathedral
and in the underground
grotto, the cave,
ancient cave and wellspring
under that cathedral,
something was
awakened within you,
perhaps something about which
you had been writing for years,
but now you were
experiencing in a new way.
>> Oh, I certainly was
experiencing something in a new
way, but it wasn't what
I was writing about.
Because when I was writing
"Goddesses in Everywoman,"
I was writing about
the archetypes,
the psychological
archetypes in women.
What was interesting is
it became a beginning text
for a grassroots women's
spirituality movement.
And it's because when you
get into the archetypal level
of the psyche and when
you touch into symbols,
you are entering the
mystery of the deepening
of your experience.
So a symbol becomes
imbued with meaning,
and therefore it becomes a
spiritual kind of experience.
So I knew that was happening.
But when I went
on this pilgrimage
and was affected by
the energy of the place
and began to remember
from an embodied place,
I started to have a
different concept about how
women's spirituality is a
spirituality in which you are
bringing back what could
be called the Goddess
or a spirituality
that is of the body,
in which sacred
experience is felt
in relationship to the Earth.
And this is true
of lot of people,
that they have their
most sacramental moments
sometimes out under the stars,
out in nature, men and women.
But then, what it
also reminded me
was of the experiences
of bearing a child
and how that was one of the
deepest spiritual experiences,
and yet because it
wasn't defined as such.
Women have had babies forever.
And I was a doctor
who delivered babies
before I had this
experience of having
one, which was very different.
But I had thought of myself as
an exception until this point.
>> Jean, we'll be
taking a brief break.
We'll be back in
just a few moments.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Welcome back to
"Thinking Allowed."
I'm your host, Jeffrey Mishlove.
we're talking about
the wellspring
of women's spirituality
with Dr. Jean Shinoda
Bolen, author of
"Crossing to Avalon"
and "Goddesses in Everywoman."
If I understand correctly
what you're saying,
Jean, that you came
to the realization
that the goddess is more than
an archetype, but an energy.
And even more than an
energy, the goddess
is the living experience
of billions of women.
>> And men too, because I
began to realize that in my own
spiritual journey, I did know
what transcendent divinity was
like because my
childhood was Christian.
And there really was a
true sense of transcendence
and connection.
>> You were a devout Christian
as a child, I gather.
>> Well, no.
>> Well, at last you wrote about
it as if there were moments.
>> No, but there was
definite moments.
My life really changed
when I was an adolescent
and went to a very
Christian summer camp
and had a life-changing interior
experience that sent me out
to be a doctor because I felt
such a sense of gratitude
for everything I
had, and that one way
I could show it or repay it,
which I never could really,
was to serve other people.
And so I did have this
adolescent idealistic notion
that came out of the spiritual
experience of service.
>> In a Christian country.
>> In a very Christian context.
And I followed it, and
it has meant a lot to me.
But now I was adding this
whole other dimension.
And it wasn't just--
it isn't just saying that
we'll change the name from god
to goddess.
It was a whole
different experience,
because there is a
god of spirituality
or a feminine mystery or
an embodied sacred that
is about the divine that
is in the material world.
And it's about the beauty
that we experience there,
the sense of being held
in an energy field,
but through and within
something that is material.
And it is a mystery,
in a sense that mystery
comes from the
word "mystes," that
was the name of the
people who were initiated
into the Eleusinian mysteries.
So anyway, yeah,
there was something
about learning
directly that there's
this realm of the sacred
that is of goddess or is
of women's spirituality
or essentially
is one of the mystical
ways of things.
>> Well, if I may be concrete,
and to follow up on what you
said earlier, a
woman gives birth.
A woman nurses.
A woman menstruates.
A woman is penetrated
in the sexual act.
All of these things are unique
to the physical experience
of women.
And as you write
about them, I come
to see that they and the
emotions that accompany them
are awesomely profound.
>> They can be.
One of the things that
really is significant
is that they're all very
physical experiences that
can be oppressive, can be
terrible under terrible
circumstances, and they can be.
But they have a possibility
of being extraordinarily
sacred under another
set of circumstances
in which the soul of the
woman is in the experience
and is picking up not
just on the physical side
but on the whole sacred
experience of being
like the goddess
who is giving birth,
is nursing, is making love, is
holding, is being the mother.
>> The epitome of
nurturing, I think.
being human about it,
because there is
something about how,
when you want to be comforted,
it does matter that the person
is in a body comforting
you, for example.
And what if, besides the
body that is comforting you,
it is within an energy field
as well that is of the goddess?
Now, that's something
of what I was describing
in "Crossing to Avalon."
And the title comes from a
book called "Mists of Avalon."
I was inspired by
"Mists of Avalon,"
the idea that you can cross
the mists from Glastonbury
to Avalon.
Glastonbury is a real place
in England that I went to
and described in
"Crossing to Avalon."
But it's also the mythical site
where you could call a barge
and go through the mist
to another reality, which
was Avalon, where
Glastonbury and Avalon are
two aspects of the same
but different realities.
>> Avalon being
the mythical realm,
the Kairotic timeless realm.
>> Right.
And there is that Kairos
versus Chronos, linear time,
logical, rational
world, mental world,
and the devalued feminine,
Kairos, timeless.
>> Eternal.
>> Odd that we should
devalue eternity.
>> Yes.
>> But to me, this is a key to
the idea of women's mysteries.
>> Or-- well, it's
human mystery.
It's when the two
worlds overlap,
where the invisible world
and the visible world
somehow become one, or
the archetypal world
and the ordinary
world cross over.
And you're in this
liminal threshold
place, where you are in this
world, human being, woman--
say, giving birth-- and
you are at that moment
aware that there's this other
energy, reality, archetype,
goddess, whatever
you want to name it,
of which you are
participating in that moment,
and that you are in
that moment tuning in,
touching in to a
embodied mystery.
>> And there is a sense when
you refer to the goddess,
if I'm correct--
and I think I've experienced
this once or twice--
a sense of being embraced.
>> Yes.
Or being-- there's something
about awe and wonder.
The word numinous describes
all of our experiences
where we are touched
by something.
And the word "ineffable" is
usually attached to them,
so we aren't doing
very well with words.
>> No.
>> But there is that place where
something that is material,
that is, not invisible,
spiritual like patriarchal
monotheism says everything
that matters usually is,
and we are deeply moved by it.
And it could be a
very male experience
of being an astronaut looking
at Earth from outer space
and seeing the
beauty of the planet
and realizing in the
heart, this is mother,
and that we are all
indigenous here.
Something changes us.
It's the same experience.
But we shift from just
being in the left brain
to some liminal
space between the two
and picking up on
another dimension.
And if people learn to trust
their own spiritual experiences
and not look to other people
to define whether it qualifies
or not, then the
world is remarkably
filled with sacred moments.
>> In your pilgrimage that
you wrote about in "Crossing
to Avalon," there were many
moments when you had intimate
conversations with other women
who were accompanying you.
And you also recall memories
of times in your life
where you felt, if I
understand it correctly,
that in the presence
of another woman
is the possibility,
for both men and women,
of a greater kind of intimacy,
a being heard, being understood
more than in either male-female
or male-male relationships,
typically.
>> Well, I think that there is
something about when you are
with your opposites.
There is an element of union.
When you're with-- when it's two
women, that there's something
about reunion, because it's
back to a mother-child dyad
that is different than the
meeting with one's opposite.
And so they're different
experiences is all I'm saying,
is that there is
a quality that is
different between union and
reunion in the energy field.
And there's something about how
you validate and find yourself
if you are open to speak of what
you truly experience and you
hear someone or you
hear someone telling
of her deep personal experience.
And it touches you
because you know
you've had the same experience.
There's a way that I think
that women as a gender
seem to have more ability to
have inter-permeating psyches.
I truly have this
sense that it's so.
And so if women are
in a circle and are
talking about their
own experiences,
they're talking
about themselves.
But invariably, this
sets up a resonance
in the other women who are
hearing or opening them
to the possibility
of that space.
Now, this is like taking--
all the archetypes
are in all of us.
And if we are in a
circle where they
are being spoken of deeply--
not from the head, but from
living, having lived there--
that it stirs it
in the listener.
And there's something
about that experience
that women seem to do.
>> I'm also under the impression
that this is true of many
groups of people who have
become repressed, suppressed,
alienated from mainstream,
conventional, white, male,
patriarchal society, that
Latinos and Blacks and other
cultures have that same
quality and the same openness
to psychic depths.
>> Well, the non-hierarchical,
top of the heap--
the people that are not at
the top of the heap, people
of color, indigenous
people, for one thing,
they're typically more embodied.
But it's changing
in our culture.
Our younger generation
listens to music and dances.
And there's something about
the ecstatic experience that
informs you about
a dimension that
is in this realm that could be
called goddess spirituality.
And it isn't-- because the realm
of goddess spirituality is not
just the realm that women have,
because women experience god,
and women experience goddess.
And men experience god
and goddess as well.
>> Jean, I think we'll
end on that note.
It's been such a pleasure
and a heartfelt experience
for me to share
this time with you.
Thank you.
>> Thank you.
Time went so fast.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]